README.md, before:

## Arch installation

### 1. Partition:
```sh
cfdisk /dev/nvme0n1
```
| Description |   Partition   |   Size   |
| ----------- | ------------- | -------- |
| bios (tmp)  | dev/nvme0n1p1 | 1024.0KB |
| efi         | dev/nvme0n1p2 | 550.0MB  |
| root        | dev/nvme0n1p3 | Rest     |

BIOS partition is temporary and will never be used
### 2. File system creation
```sh
# BOOT
mkfs.btrfs -L Base -n 32k /dev/nvme0n1p3
# EFI
mkfs.fat -F 32 /dev/nvme0n1p2
```
### 3. Mount the file system
```sh
# Mount to /mnt
mount /dev/nvme0n1p3 /mnt
# Create subvolumes
btrfs subvolume create /mnt/@
btrfs subvolume create /mnt/@home
btrfs subvolume create /mnt/@snapshots
btrfs subvolume create /mnt/@var_log

# Unmount /mnt
umount /mnt

# Mount the root subvolume
mount -o noatime,space_cache=v2,ssd,compress=zstd,discard=async,subvol=@ /dev/nvme0n1p3 /mnt
# Create the directories
mkdir -p /mnt/{boot,home,.snapshots,var_log}
# Home subvolume
mount -o noatime,space_chache=v2,ssd,compress=zstd,discard=async,subvol=@home /dev/nvme0n1p3 /mnt/home
# And the rest of the subvolumes
mount -o noatime,space_chache=v2,ssd,compress=zstd,discard=async,subvol=@snapshots /dev/nvme0n1p3 /mnt/.snapshots

mount -o noatime,space_chache=v2,ssd,compress=zstd,discard=async,subvol=@var_log /dev/nvme0n1p3 /mnt/var_log

# Mount the boot partition
mount /dev/nvme0n1p2 /mnt/boot
```
### 4. Install essential packages:
```sh
pacstrap -K /mnt base linux linux-firmware sof-firmware intel-ucode btrfs-progs base-devel inotify-tools timeshift reflector efibootmgr vim networkmanager zram-generator
```
### 5. Configure the file system
```sh
# Generate
genfstab -U /mnt >> /mnt/etc/fstab
# Check
cat /mnt/etc/fstab
```
You can change contents of fstab for optimisation such as ``noatime`` options
### 6. Chroot
```sh
arch-chroot /mnt
```
### 7. Configuring from installation
File System Table
```sh
vim /etc/mkinitcpio.conf
----------------------
# Set
MODULES=(btrfs)
----------------------
```
Update initramfs
```sh
mkinitcpio -p linux
```
Time Zone
```sh
ln -sf /usr/share/zoneinfo/Australia/Melbourne /etc/localtime
date
hwclock --systohc
```
### 8. Localization
```sh
vim /etc/locale.gen
```
go to en_US.UTF-8 UTF-8 and uncomment it then command
```sh
locale-gen
```
Create the locale config by
```sh
vim /etc/locale.conf
```
and writing 
```sh
================= /etc/locale.conf ===================
LANG=en_US.UTF-8
```
Then set keymap by
```sh
vim /etc/vconsole.conf
```
and writing 
```sh
================= /etc/vconsole.conf ===============
KEYMAP=us
```
### 9. Hostname
```sh
vim /etc/hostname
```
Edit the file with:
```sh
================= /etc/hostname ====================
archsurface
```
```sh
touch /etc/hosts
vim /etc/hosts
```
Edit the file with:
```sh
================= /etc/hosts =====================
127.0.0.1   localhost
::1         localhost
127.0.1.1   archsurface.localdomain archsurface
```

### 10. Set root password
```sh
passwd
```
### 11. Add user
```sh
useradd -m -G wheel -s /bin/bash "username"
passwd "username"
EDITOR=vim visudo
```
Near the end of the file uncomment for wheel group users
### 12. Update
```sh
su "username"
sudo pacman -Syu
exit
```
### 13. Enabling daemons
```sh
systemctl enable NetworkManager
pacman -S bluez
systemctl enable bluetooth

pacman -S intel-ucode
```
### 14. Bootloader
#### A: Using systemd-boot (Recommended)
A: 14.1 Create boot loader
```sh
# bootctl --esp-path=/efi --boot-path=/boot install
bootctl install
```
A: 14.2 Update loader config by
```sh
vim /boot/loader/loader.conf
```
and opening "loader.conf" to delete everything and write:
```sh
===================== loader.conf =======================
timeout 0
default linux.conf
```
A: 14.3 Create "linux.conf" entry
```sh
vim /boot/loader/etries/linux.conf
```
and write with your UUID
```sh
===================== linux.conf =======================
title Linux
linux /vmlinuz-linux
initrd /initramfs-linux.img
options root=UUID=.. rootflags=subvol=@ rw
# You can get UUID by using vim command :r !blkid
```
A: 14.4 Run bootctl install again
```sh
bootctl install #(or update)

systemctl enable systemd-boot-update.service # Automated update
```
#### B: Using GRUB
```sh
# Install grub
pacman -S grub grub-btrfs
# Create boot
grub-install --target=x86_64-efi --efi-directory=/boot --botloader-id=GRUB --modules="tpm" --disable-shim-lock
# Config
grub-mkconfig -o /boot/grub/grub.cfg
```
### 15. Restrict /boot permissions
```sh
chmod 700 /boot
```
### 16. Exit
```sh
exit
umount -a
reboot
```
### 17. Zram Configuration
```sh
sudo vim /etc/systemd/zram-generator.conf
```
You can edit the file:
```sh
[zram0]
zram-size = min(ram, 8192)
compression-algorithm = zstd
```

```sh
# create new devices
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl start /dev/zram0
```
### 18. Configuring for SecureBoot
#### A: Using systemd-boot + sbctl (recommended)
A: 18.1 Install sbctl in root and check status
```sh
pacman -S sbctl
sbctl status
```
A: 18.2 Create your key + enrol microsoft compatible key to UEFI
```sh
sbctl create-keys
sbctl enroll-keys -m  # DO NOT FORGET -m OPTION!
``` 
A: 18.3 Check status again and check what files need to be signed
```sh
sbctl status
sbctl verify
```
A: 18.3 Signing necessary files
```sh
# Sign kernels
sbctl sign -s /boot/vmlinuz-linux
..
# Sign efi but instead of signing directly, sign ones in systemd-boot parent
sbctl sign -s -o /usr/lib/systemd/boot/efi/systemd-bootx64.efi.signed /usr/lib/systemd/boot/efi/systemd-bootx64.efi
# This way, when we run bootctl install again, signed efi will be created from .signed
```
A: 18.4 Update bootloaders
```sh
bootctl install
```

#### B: Using grub + shim-signed
```sh
# Get prerequisite
git clone https://aur.archlinux.org/yay.git
cd yay
makepkg -si

yay -S shim-signed
sudo pacman -S sbsigntools
```
Go into root mode
```sh
# Copy to directory where your bootloader is located
cp /usr/share/shim-signed/shimx64.efi /boot/EFI/shimx64.efi
cp /usr/share/shim-signed/mmx64.efi /boot/EFI/

# Create NVRAM entry to boot shim
efibootmgr --unicode --disk /dev/nvme0n1 --part 2 --create --label "Shim" --loader /boot/EFI/shimx64.efi
```
You will need to create your own keys, sign the grub bootloader (not the shim) and the kernel, as well as enrol the key in MokManagement
You must have your own MOK.key, MOK.crt, and MOK.cer. Each time kernel or grub is updated, they need to be signed using the keypair (.key and .crt).
```sh
# Generate key pair
openssl req -newkey rsa:2048 -nodes -keyout MOK.key -new -x509 -sha256 -days 3650 -subj "/CN=my Machine Owner Key/" -out MOK.crt

openssl x509 -outform DER -in MOK.crt -out MOK.cer

# Copy cer to EFI so that you can enrol (you can also enrol using mokutil)
cp MOK.cer /boot/EFI/

# Sign your boot loader
sbsign --key MOK.key --cert MOK.crt --output /efi/vmlinuz-linux /efi/vmlinuz-linux
# Sign your kernel
sbsign --key MOK.key --cert MOK.crt --output /efi/EFI/grubx64.efi /efi/EFI/grubx64.efi
```

Since having to sign each time they are updated is tedious, you can create executable to automate it:
```sh
/etc/initcpio/post/kernel-sbsign
--------------------------------------------
#!/usr/bin/env bash

kernel="$1"
[[ -n "$kernel" ]] || exit 0

# use already install kernel if it exists
[[ ! -f "$KERNELDESTINATION" ]] || kernel="$KERNELDESTINATION"

keypairs=(/path/to/MOK.key /path/to/MOK.crt)

for (( i=0; i<${#keypairs[@]}; i+=2 )) do
    key="${keypairs[$i]}" cert="${keypairs[(( i + 1 ))]}"
    if ! sbverify --cert "$cert" "$kernel" &> /dev/null; then
        sbsign --key "$key" --cert "$cert" --output "$kernel" "$kernel"
    fi
done
```

-----------------------------------------

## Gnome Installation
### 1. Installation
```sh
sudo pacman -S xorg xorg-server
sudo pacman -S gnome
sudo pacman -S gdm
pacman -Qs gdm
sudo systemctl enable --now gdm.service
```
### 2. If encountered issue related to gnome
```sh
# Uninstall and reinstall
PRESS fn + f3 to go into tty

# Reinstall
sudo pacman -Rns gnome
sudo pacman -S gnome

# Install extras
sudo pacman -S gnome gnome-extra

# Install intel graphics driver (Not necessary)
sudo pacman -S xf86-video-intel
```

-----------------------------------------

## Replace grub with systemd-boot
### 1. Install systemd-boot as root:
```sh
bootctl install
```
### 2. Configure Loader File:
```sh
vim /boot/loader/loader.conf
```
Edit
```sh
========= loader.conf ==========
#timeout 3
default 43l34jkl32j4lk32
```
to
```sh
========= loader.conf ==========
timeout 3
default arch.conf
# you can also use default @ to save the default in boot
```
`If you used timeout 0, you can access the menu by pressing space on boot`
### 3. Create arch.conf:
```sh
# Create
vim /boot/loader/entries/arch.conf
# Write:
============== arch.conf ============
title ArchLinux
linux /vmlinuz-linux
initrd /initramfs-linux.img
options root=UUID or /dev/nvme0n1p3
```
You can get your UUID by reading in blkid via vim
```sh
:r !blkid
```
### 4. Uninstall GRUB with (ONLY AFTER CONFIRMING BOOT!):
```sh
pacman -Rcnsu grub
```
Remove contents in `/boot/grub`
then reboot
### # Removing systemd-boot if you like
```sh
bootctl remove
```

-----------------------------------------

## Create Bootable Drive for UEFI Shell
### 1. Format the drive for fat32
```
mkfs.vfat -F32 /dev/"drive"
```
### 2. Mount
```
mkdir /media/usb
mount /dev/"drive" /media/usb
cd /media/usb
```
### 3. Make directory
```
mkdir -p efi/boot/
cd efi/boot/
```
### 4. Download shell
```
sudo wget -q -O BOOTX64.efi https://github.com/tianocore/edk2/raw/edk2-stable201903/ShellBinPkg/UefiShell/X64/Shell.efi
```
-----------------------------------------

Commit message:

added some tips for secure boot

README.md, after:

## Arch installation

### 1. Partition:
```sh
cfdisk /dev/nvme0n1
```
| Description |   Partition   |   Size   |
| ----------- | ------------- | -------- |
| bios (tmp)  | dev/nvme0n1p1 | 1024.0KB |
| efi         | dev/nvme0n1p2 | 550.0MB  |
| root        | dev/nvme0n1p3 | Rest     |

BIOS partition is temporary and will never be used
### 2. File system creation
```sh
# BOOT
mkfs.btrfs -L Base -n 32k /dev/nvme0n1p3
# EFI
mkfs.fat -F 32 /dev/nvme0n1p2
```
### 3. Mount the file system
```sh
# Mount to /mnt
mount /dev/nvme0n1p3 /mnt
# Create subvolumes
btrfs subvolume create /mnt/@
btrfs subvolume create /mnt/@home
btrfs subvolume create /mnt/@snapshots
btrfs subvolume create /mnt/@var_log

# Unmount /mnt
umount /mnt

# Mount the root subvolume
mount -o noatime,space_cache=v2,ssd,compress=zstd,discard=async,subvol=@ /dev/nvme0n1p3 /mnt
# Create the directories
mkdir -p /mnt/{boot,home,.snapshots,var_log}
# Home subvolume
mount -o noatime,space_chache=v2,ssd,compress=zstd,discard=async,subvol=@home /dev/nvme0n1p3 /mnt/home
# And the rest of the subvolumes
mount -o noatime,space_chache=v2,ssd,compress=zstd,discard=async,subvol=@snapshots /dev/nvme0n1p3 /mnt/.snapshots

mount -o noatime,space_chache=v2,ssd,compress=zstd,discard=async,subvol=@var_log /dev/nvme0n1p3 /mnt/var_log

# Mount the boot partition
mount /dev/nvme0n1p2 /mnt/boot
```
### 4. Install essential packages:
```sh
pacstrap -K /mnt base linux linux-firmware sof-firmware intel-ucode btrfs-progs base-devel inotify-tools timeshift reflector efibootmgr vim networkmanager zram-generator
```
### 5. Configure the file system
```sh
# Generate
genfstab -U /mnt >> /mnt/etc/fstab
# Check
cat /mnt/etc/fstab
```
You can change contents of fstab for optimisation such as ``noatime`` options
### 6. Chroot
```sh
arch-chroot /mnt
```
### 7. Configuring from installation
File System Table
```sh
vim /etc/mkinitcpio.conf
----------------------
# Set
MODULES=(btrfs)
----------------------
```
Update initramfs
```sh
mkinitcpio -p linux
```
Time Zone
```sh
ln -sf /usr/share/zoneinfo/Australia/Melbourne /etc/localtime
date
hwclock --systohc
```
### 8. Localization
```sh
vim /etc/locale.gen
```
go to en_US.UTF-8 UTF-8 and uncomment it then command
```sh
locale-gen
```
Create the locale config by
```sh
vim /etc/locale.conf
```
and writing 
```sh
================= /etc/locale.conf ===================
LANG=en_US.UTF-8
```
Then set keymap by
```sh
vim /etc/vconsole.conf
```
and writing 
```sh
================= /etc/vconsole.conf ===============
KEYMAP=us
```
### 9. Hostname
```sh
vim /etc/hostname
```
Edit the file with:
```sh
================= /etc/hostname ====================
archsurface
```
```sh
touch /etc/hosts
vim /etc/hosts
```
Edit the file with:
```sh
================= /etc/hosts =====================
127.0.0.1   localhost
::1         localhost
127.0.1.1   archsurface.localdomain archsurface
```

### 10. Set root password
```sh
passwd
```
### 11. Add user
```sh
useradd -m -G wheel -s /bin/bash "username"
passwd "username"
EDITOR=vim visudo
```
Near the end of the file uncomment for wheel group users
### 12. Update
```sh
su "username"
sudo pacman -Syu
exit
```
### 13. Enabling daemons
```sh
systemctl enable NetworkManager
pacman -S bluez
systemctl enable bluetooth

pacman -S intel-ucode
```
### 14. Bootloader
#### A: Using systemd-boot (Recommended)
A: 14.1 Create boot loader
```sh
# bootctl --esp-path=/efi --boot-path=/boot install
bootctl install
```
A: 14.2 Update loader config by
```sh
vim /boot/loader/loader.conf
```
and opening "loader.conf" to delete everything and write:
```sh
===================== loader.conf =======================
timeout 0
default linux.conf
```
A: 14.3 Create "linux.conf" entry
```sh
vim /boot/loader/etries/linux.conf
```
and write with your UUID
```sh
===================== linux.conf =======================
title Linux
linux /vmlinuz-linux
initrd /initramfs-linux.img
options root=UUID=.. rootflags=subvol=@ rw
# You can get UUID by using vim command :r !blkid
```
A: 14.4 Run bootctl install again
```sh
bootctl install #(or update)

systemctl enable systemd-boot-update.service # Automated update
```
#### B: Using GRUB
```sh
# Install grub
pacman -S grub grub-btrfs
# Create boot
grub-install --target=x86_64-efi --efi-directory=/boot --botloader-id=GRUB --modules="tpm" --disable-shim-lock
# Config
grub-mkconfig -o /boot/grub/grub.cfg
```
### 15. Restrict /boot permissions
```sh
chmod 700 /boot
```
### 16. Exit
```sh
exit
umount -a
reboot
```
### 17. Zram Configuration
```sh
sudo vim /etc/systemd/zram-generator.conf
```
You can edit the file:
```sh
[zram0]
zram-size = min(ram, 8192)
compression-algorithm = zstd
```

```sh
# create new devices
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl start /dev/zram0
```
### 18. Configuring for SecureBoot
#### A: Using systemd-boot + sbctl (recommended)
A: 18.1 Install sbctl in root and check status
```sh
pacman -S sbctl
sbctl status
```
A: 18.2 Create your key + enrol microsoft compatible key to UEFI
```sh
sbctl create-keys
sbctl enroll-keys -m  # DO NOT FORGET -m OPTION!
``` 
A: 18.3 Check status again and check what files need to be signed
```sh
sbctl status
sbctl verify
```
A: 18.3 Signing necessary files
```sh
# Sign kernels
sbctl sign -s /boot/vmlinuz-linux
..
# Sign efi but instead of signing directly, sign ones in systemd-boot parent
sbctl sign -s -o /usr/lib/systemd/boot/efi/systemd-bootx64.efi.signed /usr/lib/systemd/boot/efi/systemd-bootx64.efi
# This way, when we run bootctl install again, signed efi will be created from .signed
```
A: 18.4 Finishing
```sh
# Update bootloaders
bootctl install

# Reboot (On Surface devices, do not change uefi mode as it will directly boot in secure boot mode)
reboot
```

#### B: Using grub + shim-signed
```sh
# Get prerequisite
git clone https://aur.archlinux.org/yay.git
cd yay
makepkg -si

yay -S shim-signed
sudo pacman -S sbsigntools
```
Go into root mode
```sh
# Copy to directory where your bootloader is located
cp /usr/share/shim-signed/shimx64.efi /boot/EFI/shimx64.efi
cp /usr/share/shim-signed/mmx64.efi /boot/EFI/

# Create NVRAM entry to boot shim
efibootmgr --unicode --disk /dev/nvme0n1 --part 2 --create --label "Shim" --loader /boot/EFI/shimx64.efi
```
You will need to create your own keys, sign the grub bootloader (not the shim) and the kernel, as well as enrol the key in MokManagement
You must have your own MOK.key, MOK.crt, and MOK.cer. Each time kernel or grub is updated, they need to be signed using the keypair (.key and .crt).
```sh
# Generate key pair
openssl req -newkey rsa:2048 -nodes -keyout MOK.key -new -x509 -sha256 -days 3650 -subj "/CN=my Machine Owner Key/" -out MOK.crt

openssl x509 -outform DER -in MOK.crt -out MOK.cer

# Copy cer to EFI so that you can enrol (you can also enrol using mokutil)
cp MOK.cer /boot/EFI/

# Sign your boot loader
sbsign --key MOK.key --cert MOK.crt --output /efi/vmlinuz-linux /efi/vmlinuz-linux
# Sign your kernel
sbsign --key MOK.key --cert MOK.crt --output /efi/EFI/grubx64.efi /efi/EFI/grubx64.efi
```

Since having to sign each time they are updated is tedious, you can create executable to automate it:
```sh
/etc/initcpio/post/kernel-sbsign
--------------------------------------------
#!/usr/bin/env bash

kernel="$1"
[[ -n "$kernel" ]] || exit 0

# use already install kernel if it exists
[[ ! -f "$KERNELDESTINATION" ]] || kernel="$KERNELDESTINATION"

keypairs=(/path/to/MOK.key /path/to/MOK.crt)

for (( i=0; i<${#keypairs[@]}; i+=2 )) do
    key="${keypairs[$i]}" cert="${keypairs[(( i + 1 ))]}"
    if ! sbverify --cert "$cert" "$kernel" &> /dev/null; then
        sbsign --key "$key" --cert "$cert" --output "$kernel" "$kernel"
    fi
done
```

-----------------------------------------

## Gnome Installation
### 1. Installation
```sh
sudo pacman -S xorg xorg-server
sudo pacman -S gnome
sudo pacman -S gdm
pacman -Qs gdm
sudo systemctl enable --now gdm.service
```
### 2. If encountered issue related to gnome
```sh
# Uninstall and reinstall
PRESS fn + f3 to go into tty

# Reinstall
sudo pacman -Rns gnome
sudo pacman -S gnome

# Install extras
sudo pacman -S gnome gnome-extra

# Install intel graphics driver (Not necessary)
sudo pacman -S xf86-video-intel
```

-----------------------------------------

## Replace grub with systemd-boot
### 1. Install systemd-boot as root:
```sh
bootctl install
```
### 2. Configure Loader File:
```sh
vim /boot/loader/loader.conf
```
Edit
```sh
========= loader.conf ==========
#timeout 3
default 43l34jkl32j4lk32
```
to
```sh
========= loader.conf ==========
timeout 3
default arch.conf
# you can also use default @ to save the default in boot
```
`If you used timeout 0, you can access the menu by pressing space on boot`
### 3. Create arch.conf:
```sh
# Create
vim /boot/loader/entries/arch.conf
# Write:
============== arch.conf ============
title ArchLinux
linux /vmlinuz-linux
initrd /initramfs-linux.img
options root=UUID or /dev/nvme0n1p3
```
You can get your UUID by reading in blkid via vim
```sh
:r !blkid
```
### 4. Uninstall GRUB with (ONLY AFTER CONFIRMING BOOT!):
```sh
pacman -Rcnsu grub
```
Remove contents in `/boot/grub`
then reboot
### # Removing systemd-boot if you like
```sh
bootctl remove
```

-----------------------------------------

## Create Bootable Drive for UEFI Shell
### 1. Format the drive for fat32
```
mkfs.vfat -F32 /dev/"drive"
```
### 2. Mount
```
mkdir /media/usb
mount /dev/"drive" /media/usb
cd /media/usb
```
### 3. Make directory
```
mkdir -p efi/boot/
cd efi/boot/
```
### 4. Download shell
```
sudo wget -q -O BOOTX64.efi https://github.com/tianocore/edk2/raw/edk2-stable201903/ShellBinPkg/UefiShell/X64/Shell.efi
```
-----------------------------------------
